---
layout: post
title: "Ecclesiastes 3:11"
tags:
  - Grad School Life
---

There's a Bible verse reference that I once scrawled in sharpie on the top center of the backpack I wore through high school and most of college: Ecclesiastes 3:11. I would tromp around the campus of Kansas State University, and, it being a state school that was for all intents and purposes a Protestant evangelical university, I'd get questions about my Bible verse. I knew, when I was asked, that I was being asked by someone who knew the book but not the verse. It was a covert code among those of us in the fold that we shared referents, if not the exact content.

I liked that my Bible verse got asked about. It made me feel like I was a person, identifiable by a code but not able to be reduced by the referent, because this verse was, after all, still a little obscure. I was a person, unique, but locatable within a community of the saved.

Ecclesiastes 3:11 was also a verse that served as a stop-gap in my salvation, keeping it alive when nothing else within me was doing the job. Here's how it read in the version I knew it by at the time:

> He has made everything beautiful in its time. Also, he has put eternity into man's heart, yet so that he cannot find out what God has done from the beginning to the end. (English Standard Version)

I discovered this verse in high school, at a time when I was looking for cultural touchstones that would set me apart as a person among people and that would still be authentically meaningful to me. It was perfect. The verse arrives in the context of the most authentic-seeming book in the Bible, a book traditionally understood as written by the wisest man that ever lived, informing the assembly of the faithful what the meaning of life is before he passes away, with all his wisdom. Notoriously, this book contains the word "meaninglessness" or "vanity" some 42 times or so. King Solomon, son of the great King David, gathers the assembly of the nation together before his death (hence, "ecclesiastes," "kohelet," *a member of the assembly*) to dispense his supernatural wisdom—this man who also traditionally wrote Song of Songs and Proverbs, one the work of a young man making metaphysically-much of his sexual life and the other the aphoristic wisdom of a gifted man in his prime. I have to believe that the congregation was shocked by what this wise man dispensed there at the end.

The bulk of the book expresses in a depressed mode: how life is meaningless, vanity, vanity, all is vanity, that a man may only find joy in his work and in the simple pleasures of life and not hope for anything more. It contains the lines made famous first by a lefty folk singer and then a pop band in the 1960s: "To everything, turn, turn, turn, there is a season, turn, turn, turn, and a time to every purpose under heaven." Lines, which, under the strictest moralism, express the principle of moderation going back to Aristotle but rooting the events of life not along a line of quality but according to the involuntary cycle of the wheel of fortune, under heaven. If anything, these are lines about letting go and getting swept away in the river of time, acknowledging in passing that whatever happens was meant to, when it did, and nothing more. Nothing was leading to this and nothing will come from it, but the wheel will keep turning, the river keep running.

There's a kind of serenity that one can find in the quietism of everything being intentional yet insufficiently conditioned.

This Bible book also contains a poem at the end, in its neat twelfth chapter (a big number in this Bible), a collection of metaphors referring to the process of aging. It says, at first, to remember your creator when you get old and your body stops working, your eyes don't catch the light, your joints don't turn the gears, your teeth fall out, your dick doesn't get hard anymore, and your body's preparing to dissolve back into dust. After all that, it lands with, "Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher; all is vanity." There an appendical conclusion that commands to fear God and obey his rules—that God's still gonna judge you in the end—but commentators argue this was a later edit by the priestly class attempting to contain the work's loose ending.

So here we have THE wise man, saying, at the end, that nothing matters anyway. Of all the scriptures I ever read and memorized, this was the only one that gave me genuine peace when I needed it: a passage that my community, because of their commitments, had to recognize as true and good and that, nonetheless, told us that, no matter how hard we tried, meaning was still always going to be elusive. We just had to do our best and try to enjoy life—that's all we get in the meanwhile.

Nestled in the middle of this book is Ecclesiasted 3:11, my "life verse."

As I understood it at the time, this verse says that despite all the things about time and the world that make no sense to us, God is working it all out to be beautiful. The verse implicitly instructs us—like the book of Job—to suspend judgment on a world we have a low, myopic view of. Things are rough, things are bad, it seems, but God's gonna make something beautiful out of it all. And in fact, the very fact that we wonder about it all is determined by God's having already planted in our hearts the idea of eternity. We want something more because we were given to dream of more. We've got eternity in our hearts, yet all we see is time—just trust that God's going to make something beautiful out of all this bullshit.

Everything I ever found reassuring in those last handful of years in the faith were the lines that gave me reason to wait a little more. This verse was foremost among them. But then I kept waiting, and waiting, and the waiting began to sap my will to wait any more. God was silent, somewhere else, or nowhere at all. Finally, I stopped waiting.

In those years of college, I also serendipitously arrived at a history class on Medieval Christianity—a course out of my major but that ended up shaping me more than any literature course did. During that course, in which I was given the chance to contextualize the structure and system of my youth into a world-historical frame, in which doctrine was always, always muddled in the political exigence of the moment and in which the life-and-death adherence to faith had far less to do with metaphysical reality and far more to do with concrete social reality, I allowed myself to think of my faith as a useful fiction. One that was becoming less useful to me by the hour.

My professor for that course—a younger man at the time, baby on the way, lefty, a Catholic democratic socialist by self-identification (I owe him a lot)—told us that the closest translation we have to how peasants in the Middle Ages might have heard the scriptures is the Douay-Rheims English translation of the Latin Vulgate. That version gives us Ecclesiastes 3:11 as follows:

> He hath made all things good in their time, and hath delivered the world to their consideration, so that man cannot find out the work which God hath made from the beginning to the end. (Douay-Rheims 1899 American Edition)

I revisited this version tonight and was struck by the way it subordinates the idea that God works all things toward a kind of eternal beauty to the notion that he *delivers the world to our consideration* meanwhile. This version tells us that the long work of creation is ongoing, that Genesis provided us a promise that God called all things good when he made them, but that he's still working on it. In a way, this makes God more relatable to me: he's been working on this shit for a long time, and while it's not *there* yet, it will be, when the time comes. I'm also working and still not *there* yet.

But in the Douay-Rheims God delivers us the world for our consideration. A parodical reading might take it that he situates us as beta-testers on a world he himself hasn't figured out yet, but I read it in a way that's either more or less cynical. This world is given us in the meanwhile as the object for our consideration, after it all started yet before it's all finished and "good." And while we're so focused on considering this world, no matter how hard we try, we're not ever going to figure out what it is that God's so busy working on. There's a work here—maybe a work of art—but we're spectators on an unfinished process, distracted by the globs of paint spattering the canvas during the messy block-in, not knowing if this is actually the final render or just the underdrawing. That's how I feel, how I've felt, even back then as a teen trying to be okay with still trying to figure it all out, that all I can focus on is the world I see, not the one that's still gonna get finished.

If we're caught up in considering the world, what else is there to care about? Nothing. We've got this world, and if we can't figure it out, that's still all we have to go on, in actually-existing life.

I've written this kind of essay before, many times actually, when I was a more forgivable 23 or so. Now I'm almost 29, nearly 30 that is, and it's a little less cute. But the truth of the experience is sharper than ever—to grow up within a framed picture of evangelical eternity isn't something cute but something that captures you like a culprit, something you have to shake off and never quite get rid of. People in the psych world might call it trauma. Trauma, in one sense, means a dream: it's the dream we thought were living in, and the shock that comes from finding out that the world was something totally different. You don't just grow out of that, at least not in those moments when it's just you and the world, alone, trying to make some kind of sense. We're still considering the world, like those medieval peasants, no better off than them with regard to the Great Work of Creation. It's all a very banal trauma, a generational trauma that many of us are stuck in, and maybe some of us have found a way out of. Not me, though I thought I was one of the saved of the Saved—I'm still figuring it out, actually.

There's a song that every time I hear it I listen to it a few times more in sequence: Jason Isbell's "24 Frames." I discovered this artist via an old roommate who I once had a grand old falling out with, a fight about a girl. I figured at the time that this was the kind of fight that real people in the real world would have, and that I was now in the messiness of the real world. However, the girl at the center of this stupid fight is today no longer alive, at her own hand. I no longer know what this real world is that people have fights about. You get a sense of the world, and then you realize that there are real stakes and that the world really changes, and sometimes there's a blackhole at the center that wasn't there before. But you learn of that empty space long after you were there, caring about someone who once held that space that wasn't empty at the time. At least I did.

That song by that artist includes this line, which wrecks me every time:

> You thought God was an architect, now you know /
> He's something like a pipe bomb ready to blow (Jason Isbell, "24 Frames")

I used to love Ecclesiastes 3:11 because it assured me that God had a designer's beautiful sense of this world, which I hadn't seen all of yet and so couldn't understand the beauty. I know what it is to try to draw something, not wanting anyone to see it before it's finished, because it's still in its ugly stage. But the only hope in this kind of sentiment is that it might get worked out, eventually—some event will happen when this mess gets God-blessed. Now, after all these years, long after I retired the Ecclesiastes 3:11 backpack because I was embarrassed of its sloganeering faith, I realize with such profound pain that there's no architect here, that the fiction I'd put my faith in did nothing but blow up my life. Here I am, well into adulthood, trying to make my way with no sense of design to trace. There's a beauty and a freedom in that, sure, but it's a deeply determinant beauty. We only know the determinants of our life's design after the fact, I'm afraid. When we're in it, we wouldn't (and shouldn't?) know exactly what makes life beautiful.

I did a lot of laundry today, this week, this year, always a little too late. I got myself out of bed, a little later than I meant. I read a little. I renewed my driver's license. I roasted a chicken. I prepared leftovers for the next day, with potatoes and carrots, the first Thanksgiving meal I'll ever share with just myself. Sad, I know, but at least I can eat chicken, because I never particularly liked turkey, or putting on a good face to those still in the Architect's world. Part of leaving behind that world delivered to our consideration is that you never actually leave it behind—you reenter many times a year, and while they all might know that you no longer belong, you still love them and they still love you. You do your best. I'll see them at Christmas, that architect's birthday. We'll be a family, whether or not we all see the architect's pipe-bomb designs, whether in the windshield or in the rearview mirror.

Until then, we've still got the world, and it includes so much more than bad news and dumb work. As I write this, I'm hearing a song by another wayfaring once-believer, Chris Thile of Nickle Creek and the Punch Brothers. I'm hearing in my "Folk & Acoustic Mix" on Spotify a song included on his recent solo album called "Laysongs," that is, songs for the normal people—unpriestly. The song is titled "Ecclesiastes 2:24," and it's an instrumental mandolin track with tension at the center but with whimsy and happy resignation at the edges. The verse the title refers to says, "There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God."

Forget the last part—we make our own good, and we don't need to resign the hard effort to a fiction's once leading figure. And the work is good, to make our souls enjoy the good in our work, whatever it might be. That's all we have, after all, and there's nothing better for us than that we should live, and that we should enjoy such good.